#10.0 Psionics
There are two aspects to special abilities such as magic, prayers, or psionics. The first is power points. These are bought as a skill. A character with 5 ranks in the Power skill and a +10 stat bonus would have a total of 35 Power Points [PP]. You may not develop the Power skill unless you have the Latent Power talent.
The second element is the actual special ability known. Special abilities have a base cost in PP and additional options that can scale the ability in different ways. You may not use a special ability until you have sufficient ranks in that special ability to meet the base cost and you may not put more PP into a special ability than you have ranks in that special ability.
Every special ability is developed individually.
Many effects are dependent on the number of ranks known in the special ability.
Durations listed as rounds/rank will last for that many rounds for a single expenditure of PP.
If the duration has a number of rounds and a (C), the duration is the number of rounds or until concentration is broken/stopped, which ever comes first.
Some special abilities can be reversed to product an opposite effect. If this is possible it is listed in the description. The reversed version must be learned independently of the original. You cannot just decide, in the moment, which version you want.

##10.1 Using Special Abilities
Using special abilities is called Casting. To cast a special ability the caster makes a d100 roll adding their Stat Bonus to the Casting Roll (CR). Different special abilities will use different stat bonuses.
**example**
Mediations (Psionics) could use the sum of Pr+Re+Sd stat bonuses. 
Spiritual Magic could use Em+In+Pr bonuses.

A caster declares the special ability to be cast and the action takes up to 3AP. At the end of the action the casting roll is made. The stat bonus is added. If less than 3AP are used the casting roll recieves -25 when 2AP are used and -50 when 1AP is used. You cannot cast a special ability using 0AP.
Note: The roll is open ended both up and down.
If the final result is greater than zero the special ability is successfully cast and takes effect.
If the target is unwilling they may resist. To resist they make a Resistance Test rolling d100 and adding the sum of two stat bonsues. Teh two will be the first two listed stats used in casting (Pr+Re Psionics, Em+In for Spiritual MAgic). If their Resistance Test result if greater than the CR then they have resisted the effect. Teh resistor only uses two stat bonuses compared to the casters three, to give the caster a greater chance of success.
If a special ability has been resisted it has no effect. All special abilities may be resisted, even beneficial ones.
Resistance Tests are not compulsory. You do not need to resist a psionic that you consent to. If you withdraw consent at any time before the special abiltiy is complete a resistance test is allowed.
This rule exists explicitly to prevent someone being told that the special ability is healing when in reality it is an attempt to control or harm. It should be interpreted as the targets psychic recoiling from a negative effect.

** Example Spiritual Magic**
Healing Meditation
PP Cost: 3
Range: Self
Duration: Immediate
Description: The caster is able to heal damage to themselves. The caster must select one of the following options when the meditation is cast.
Reduce a maneuver penalty by up to 20 points.
Reduce bleeding by up to 5 points.
Heal up to one quarter of their concussion hits.
Scaling Options:
Increase Healing (heal 2 of the above options)  +2 PP
Increase Healing (heal all 3 options at once) +4 PP
Increase Healing (stop death in x rounds) +7 PP

