#12.0 Combat
##12.1 Overview
Personal Combat is defined as any battle between two or more characters (player and/or non-player) that takes place using Melee or Missile Attacks as well as Maneuvers,  Meditations and Gifts.
When a combat starts Initiative is rolled for each combatant, or group of combatants. Initiative decides the order in which the characters act.
Each action has a cost in Action Points (See 9.1) and each character has 4AP to spend each round (8AP with the help of Mystic Gifts).
The group with the lowest Initiative declares their actions first, and then the next lowest until all actions have been declared.
Actions are resolved from Highest initiative to the lowest. A character may choose to act later in the initiative order but they cannot move before their turn.
Once all the characters in the combat have acted a new combat round starts.
Initiative is rolled once per combat, not per round.
When a character has their turn they may choose to make any combination of actions and attacks. Once an attack is made it is resolved and any effects are applied immediately.
##12.2 Rolling Initiative
Each Character rolls their own initiative by rolling d100 and adding their total Quickness [Qu] bonus to the roll. A higher initiative is better than a low initiative.
##12.3 Making an Attack
To make an attack the player makes a d100 roll and adds their characters weapon skill to the roll plus any situational modifiers. The GM deducts any penalties such as the defenders Defensive Bonus and any cover. The final result is compared to an attack table cross referencing the defenders armor and the total roll. The result gives a number of points of damage and a possible letter that describes a specific wound. The wounds are called Criticals and are graded A to E and a type such as S for slashing wounds or B for burns. A result would look something like 20AS for 20 hits of damage and an A grade Slashing wound.
Krush is used in place of Crush to save confusion when the result would be a ‘C’ severity, CK not CC.
A second d100 roll is made on the matching critical table to find the actual effects of the attack.
There are different attack tables for different weapons to give them unique strengths and weaknesses.
##12.4 Maneuvers in Combat
A character may make maneuvers in combat such as running or diving for cover. Each character may move their Base Move (BM) per round with no need to make any rolls unless the movement is opposed. You cannot just choose to move past an armed guard that you are fighting. The opposition is simply assumed and the move would fail.
To move more than your BM requires you to use AP. 1AP allows you to move your BM in the combat round at that point. 
Example: You may spend 1AP on movement to close the distance with a target. Spending AP on movement in addition to the free move each round.
You may also make specific maneuvers in a round such as leaping off a balcony or trying to swing from a cable hanging from a gantry.
If your maneuver roll was successful then you have completed the maneuver. If the maneuver result was less than 100% the GM may decide on the outcome. Either the maneuver is not completed or the maneuver gives a penalty to your next action.
**Example 1:** You are trying to chase an escaping villain. You want to get to a door first and slam it shut. The GM  gives you a difficulty penalty to out run the fleeing figure. You make your roll and the result is only 80%. The GM decides you did not make it to the door in time.
**Example 2:**You want to leap off a cargo container on to two security guards below. You make a maneuver to jump down gaining surprise on the guards. You make the roll and get 80%. The GM decides your attack on the guard will be at -20 due to you being slightly off balance from your landing.
**Example 3: **You want to try and make it behind some cover as the security forces open fire on you. Your attempt to sprint for cover results in a roll of 80%. Rather than having your still out in the open until the following round the GM gives one of the security forces a single shot at you at +20 but if you survive you will start the round behind cover.
##12.5 Parrying
Parrying refers to any decision to favor defense over offence. It does not require you to have a weapon or to make physical contact with your attacker. Examples of parrying could be a blade on blade sword fight, martial artists blocking blows, ducking and diving behind furniture or throwing dust into your attackers eyes. Any form of dodging or evading counts as parrying.
Obviously you cannot dodge something moving at the speed of light, but you can evade the shooters aim.
You can only parry attacks you can see being aimed at you.
To parry you deduct a proportion of your Offensive Bonus and add it to your Defensive Bonus.
Parry is assigned specific foes. If you are fighting two security guards you could attack with half your Offensive Bonus [OB] and divide the other half equally between your two assailants.
**Example: You have a +80 OB. You can add +20 to your DB against both assailants and still attack with +40OB**
Parrying hand to hand weapons and attacks 1 point of Offensive Bonus [OB] becomes 1 point of Defensive Bonus [DB].
Parrying missile and projectile weapons 2 points of OB becomes 1 point of DB.
Parrying energy weapons 4 points of OB becomes 1 point of DB.
You cannot parry if you are constrained and cannot move.
