#7.0 Skills
Skills are the core way in which characters differentiate themselves. Two Armsman may have wildly different skill sets with one preferring concealed weapons and training in observation as a bodyguard and another trained in the heavy armor and weapons of a space marine.
There are four types of skills. Simple Skills, Combat Expertise Skills, Combat Skills and Psionic skills. Any skill marked with a CE is a Combat Expertise.
Simple skills may be used in two ways. The first is a straight test of skill where an open ended roll is made, the skill total is added to the roll and difficulty factors are subtracted. If the result is 100+ the skill test succeeds. Skills may also be used as subject knowledge. Having a skill in Music: flute would allow you to play the flute but it would also allow you to recognize a quality instrument and to make simple repairs and carry out maintenance. 
Combat expertise skills can only be used to reduce penalties. The most common is Move in Armor. As armor may be restrictive and encumbering, this skill reflects the training in using armor effectively and reduces the encumbrance penalties associated with using armor. There could be an infinite number of combat expertise skills such as using two weapons at the same time, or fighting while blind using your other senses. These should be discussed between GM and player before buying the skill.
Combat Skills do not use the 101+ success or failure mechanic. Combat skills use an open ended roll, plus skill total and any other bonuses and any penalties are deducted. The final result is compared to a combat table and the result of the attack is read off the table. A better combat skill roll will do more damage than a poor skill roll even if both attacks hit their target.
Psionic skills use special rules that are explained in the chapter 10.0 Psionics, see page 42.
##7.1 Skill Bonuses
Skills are designed to give diminishing returns. Simple Skills, Combat Expertise Skills, Combat Skills all use this tailing off of benefits. The first 10 ranks in a skill give a +5 skill bonus per rank.
The second 10 ranks in the skill gives +2 bonus per rank.
All ranks beyond the 20th rank give a +1 bonus per rank.
If you have no ranks in a skill you may still attempt it at your GM’s discretion. Some things are simply not possible without some training. For example, without some basic knowledge developing a vaccine for an alien disease is simply not possible regardless of how well you roll. Such unskilled attempts are made with a skill bonus of -25 although you may still apply Stat bonuses which may reduce that penalty.	If you have a related skill the GM may allow you to use some or all of your related skill bonus. If you are skilled in playing the flute and are confronted with an alien musical instrument that is still woodwind in principle then the GM may allow you to use your flute skill but apply a substantial difficulty factor. If the instrument was more like a guitar then this is much less similar but the principles of reading music or following a tune remain the same. The GM may allow you to use the number ranks you have in flute as your skill bonus plus your stats for playing such a different instrument.
##7.2 Professional Skills
Each character may select 10 specific skills to be their professional skills. Some GMs may have already designated up to five of these for you. If you had Weapon1:Laser Pistol and Weapon2:Laser Rifle despite them both being lasers they would count as different skills. The same would apply to different musical instruments or regions of local knowledge.
Once a skill is chosen the character gains +2 skill bonus for every rank the character knows in that specific skill up a maximum of +40.
##7.3 Adding New Skills
The skills presented here are only a tiny proportion of all the skills that GMs may want to use. If you want to run a game of futuristic espionage you may want to expand the number of skills for that genre. At the moment the skills are intended to cover multiple situations. For example the Climbing skill would also cover abseiling and rappelling as well as climbing. These skills could easily be broken out to create new skills.
You may also want to create specialisms. For example there is at present only one Pick Locks skill but that could be easily turned into two or more skills such as Pick Locks: Mechanical and Pick Locks: Electronic.
For completely new skills the costs must be set for each profession in play. New Combat Expertise skills may be introduced to reflect special training.
Example: Combat Awareness CE could reduce the penalty for making perception skill tests using less than the normal number of Action Points.
There is a ladder of skill costs. You decide the relationship between the skill and the profession.
|1/2||
|1/3|  A core skill|
|2/2||
|2/3||
|2/4|   A related skill|
|3/4||
|3/5|   The basic cost for all skills|
|4/6||
|5/7|   A skill that is unusual for the profession|
|6/8||
|7/10|  The skill is totally alien to the profession|
9/12||
|12/15| Restricted|

Between each base cost (1/3, 2/4, 3/5 etc.) are unused costs. These are used for further differentiation. For example, if you created a Special Forces profession and wanted to differentiate it from the regular Armsman you could cost Survival and Ambush/Sniper skills one step cheaper than the Armsman while compensating by making Forgery and Pick Locks one step more expensive.
Not every skill has to have different costs for every rank. A skill could be listed as 1/1 which means that a character can buy an unlimited number of ranks for 1DP each
#7.4 Stat Bonuses
Stat bonuses are added together and then added to the total skill bonus. Most skills use three stats. The stat names have been abbreviated in the following form.
Constitution [Co], Agility [Ag], Strength [St], Quickness [Qu];Self Discipline [Sd], Reasoning [Re], Memory[Me], Presence [Pr], Intuition [In], and Empathy [Em].
#7.5 Skill Descriptions
##Combat
**Move In Armor CE [St, Ag, Co]**
This skill reduces the penalties incurred for using bulky and restricting armors and suits. It can never give a bonus, only reduce penalties to zero.
**Combat Expertise (CE) [varies]**
Combat Expertise skills are used to reduce penalties. Common CE skills are fighting with two weapons at the same time such as two swords, or sword and dagger or two pistols. Another option is to make an additional attack in the same round, popular with martial artists.
**Weapon 1 [St, Ag, Ag] ranged/[St, St, Ag] melee**
This is your primary weapon. The same skill cost applies to all weapons of the same form factor. All pistols would use the same price, although they would need to be developed independently. Once you know a weapon you know how to use it in all its configurations. If you know Knife you can stab and slash with it but also throw it. When thrown it incurs range penalties but uses your full skill.
**Weapon 2 [St, Ag, Ag] ranged/[St, St, Ag] melee**
This is a second weapon type. This is at a slightly higher price as it is not your core focus.
**Weapon 3 [St, Ag, Ag] ranged/[St, St, Ag] melee**
A tertiary weapon skill. All additional weapons pay this price. If you knew Blaster Pistol (Weapon 1), Auto Blaster [Weapon 2] and Heavy Blaster [Weapon 3] you could still learn RPG Launcher and it would cost the same as Weapon 3.
Note: Heavy Weapons: Starships use Heavy Weapons. Heavy Weapons may be taken as one of your weapon skills. There are several different types of heavy weapon, and each has to be developed as a separate skill. E.g. Heavy Laser, Ion Chargers and Proton Missiles
##General
**Acrobatics/Tumbling [Ag, Qu,Sd]**
A successful skill roll can reduce the damage from falling by reducing the fall attack roll by -20. When a character is flying under a meditation or mystic gift, Acrobatics/Tumbling skill may be used with a -20 modifier for performing airborne maneuvers.
**Climbing [St, Ag, Co]**
This skill allows you to climb, with or without equipment, walls and rock faces. Extended climbs may require several climbing skill checks.
**Music [In, Ag, Sd]**
This skill is used for both composition and performance. Each instrument should be developed as a separate skill. If more than one musical skill is known, such as singing and guitar, the higher of the two skills is used for testing a performance.
**Swimming [St, Ag, Sd]**
A single rank in swimming is barely enough to keep you afloat and characters with no ranks in swimming simply cannot swim.
**Riding [Ag, Co, Em]**
Riding is used when riding an animal. It may be bought multiple times for use with different animals such as horse, camel, elephant. Similar animals may use the same skill but with increased difficulty such as horse, mule and donkey. Flying mounts still use this skill. For mounted combat a successful riding roll is required each combat round to have sufficient control to be able to fight.
**Trickery [Ag, Re, In]**
This skill is used for slight of hand and misdirection. It can be used for performing card tricks or small acts of theft, typically pick pocketing.
**Pick Locks [In, Ag, Sd]**
This skill is used for both electronic and mechanical locks. The quality of the lock will affect the difficulty but also the amount of time and damage the lock picker is prepared to do to the lock. It is easier to pick a lock if you are not worried about leaving marks or even smashing the face-plate off to get to the innards.
**Stalk/Hide [Ag, Sd, Em]**
This skill is used for moving silently or hiding effectively when stationary. The conditions such as cover and lighting all affect the difficulty.
**Perception [In, Re, Em]**
Possibly one of the most important skills in the game! Perception is used to see if your characters sees, hears or feels anything significant. If the character is ‘passive’, i.e. not actively listening or searching, the GM rolls the characters perception skill tests and then works the result into the game narrative. If the player states that they are actively searching, listening or trying to detect something then the player may make the skill test.
**Driving [In, Em, Ag]**
This skill covers anything that has some sort of surface effect. That includes marine vehicles, hovercraft, wheeled or even grav-bikes or sleds. The skill should be developed separately for each type of vehicle such as marine or hovercraft. Different designs of vehicle with a type only impose difficulty factors if the character is unfamiliar with them e.g. a character familiar with grav-sleds suddenly finds herself on a grav-bike would suffer higher difficulties due to lack of familiarity with the handling and controls.
**Ambush/Sniper [In, Re, Qu]**
Ambush and sniper need to be developed separately and for each weapon. When attempting to ambush a foe the attacker must be unobserved or the foe unaware. The ambush roll skill check is made and on a success the critical rolled may be adjusted up or down by the number of ranks in Ambush with that weapon. The result may not be adjusted to a ‘66’ result. If the target is active, such as moving fast or is in combat then only half the number of ranks may be used to adjust the critical result. Ambush is only to be used with Melee weapons, Sniper is used with ranged weapons that use a direct line of sight. These skills can be used with meditations if they meet the criteria of a direct physical attack.
**Languages [Me, Re, Em]**
Languages are bought separately for spoken and written usage. A standard skill test is used to see if the listener or reader understands the communication. The number of ranks limits the sophistication of the vocabulary known. One rank gives just the barest basics. 6 ranks [+30 skill] gives a functioning vocabulary for everyday use. Most people are considered to have 10 ranks in their own language in both spoken and written, although academics may have many more. 
**Physique [Co, Sd, St]**
Physique is to be considered one of the essential skills. Physique is literally strength and conditioning training and the skill confers additional hit points, to the character. Hit points are referred to a #Hits as a standard abbreviation in the combat tables, meaning number of hit points of damage the character has taken.
##Mental
**Mental Focus [Sd, Pr,Em]**
There are several Mental Focus skills and they all need developing separately. Mental Focus skills require a combat round, or 5 seconds to prepare before they are used. In some cases to a combat round is required to recover from using a mental focus skill. During the preparation or recover round the character takes a -20 penalty to all actions. Before initiative is rolled in the following round the character rolls their Mental Focus skill to see if they succeeded. Once a Mental Focus state has been achieved it may be maintained for additional rounds but the skill must be retested each subsequent round at a cumulative -10 per round.
**Mental Focus: Speed** gives the character an additional 4 Action Points per round and in addition the number of ranks in Mental Focus: Speed may be added to their initiative roll.
**Mental Focus: Strength** gives the character an additional +15 strength bonus, which would be added to any skill tests using strength for the duration. Skills that have strength listed more than once as a stat bonus will benefit from multiple +15 bonuses. 
Example: Melee attacks use St+St+Ag as their stat bonus. In this case the bonus from Mental Focus: Strength would be +30.

**Mental Focus: Calm** gives a character a +15 bonus that may be applied once per round to either Agility bonus or Self Discipline bonus, but not both in the same round. Where the bonus is to be applied is declared before the roll is made but can be moved with every successful skill test.
**Mental Focus: Defense [Sd, Pr,Qu]**
**Mental Focus: Defense** allows a character to focus their mind on sensing and avoiding attacks. The character cannot be encumbered, they must not have any net maneuver penalty from either armor, excessive equipment or injury. A successful Mental Focus: Defense skill test is made before initiative is rolled and on success the number of ranks in Mental Focus: Defense is added to the characters Defensive Bonus for the entire round. As with all Mental Focus skills one combat round is required to prepare and during that round the character has -20 on all actions. Mental Focus: Defense can be maintained for multiple rounds but each subsequent round incurs a cumulative -10 penalty to the skill roll.
**Forgery [Ag, Re, In]**
This skill is used for creating forgeries of objects or documents. It is assumed that the correct tools are available and if not, this should be reflected in the difficulty factor of the skill test.
**Survival [Re, Me, In]**
This skill encompasses the knowledge and practical skills needed to survive in a hostile environment. It is normally developed once for each biome such as Survival: Desert or Arctic. Trying to survive in an unfamiliar environment incurs higher difficulty penalties. This skill includes foraging for food, building fires and rigging shelters. 
**First Aid [Em, Re, In]**
This skill can be used to stop bleeding and to stabilize an injured person or immobilize a broken limb.
**Handheld Scanners [Re, Me, In]**
This skill allows the correct use and interpretation of the output of scanners and other handheld complex devices. 
##Pilot
**Combat Pilot [In, Qu,Ag]**
This skill is used for determining the order of events in a space combat, and a character may use this skill divided by 2 to fire a ships weapons if the appropriate specific weapon skill is missing.
**Space Pilot [In, Re, Ag]**
Piloting is divided into three types, atmospheric is used for aircraft travelling through the atmosphere. Hyperspace piloting is for flying at faster than light speeds. Between those two extremes is normal space piloting. This skill is used for atmosphere piloting, achieving orbit to the point where a ship exceeds the speed of light and enters hyperspace. Most ship to ship combat takes place in this period of travel. 
**Hyperspace Pilot [Re, Me, Ag]**
Hyperspace pilots control their ship through faster than light travel. This skill covers successfully entering and leaving hyperspace.
**Space Navigation [Re, Me, In]**
This skill covers the plotting of courses through space, identifying jump points where ships need to enter or leave hyperspace and entering these courses into the ships computers.
**Ship Sensors [Re, Me, In]**
This skill covers successfully scanning ships, objects or planets and interpreting the results. Many factors affect the difficulty of scanning from the size of the object, distance to atmospheric conditions.
##Technical
**Tech: Mechanical [Ag, In, Re]**
Mechanical technician provides a working understanding of mechanical systems and the knowledge of how best to effect repairs or modifications. This skill is used frequently for diagnosing problems with mechanical systems. Mechanical technician can run diagnostic tests and use diagnostic software.
**Tech: Arms [Ag, In, Re]**
This skill gives a technical understanding of how weapon systems work and allows the diagnosis of weapons failures. This also covers the techniques for ballistic reports such as matching spent ammunition to specific weapons.
**Tech: Computer [Ag, In, Re]**
This skill is used for diagnosing and effecting repairs to computer systems. This skill can be used for removing viruses and malware.
**Tech: CSI [In, Em, Re]**
This skill confers a range of technical abilities such as analyzing blood splatter patterns, lifting fingerprints from surfaces and analyzing the residue from weapons being discharged.
**Tech: Medical [Ag, Em, In]**
This skill allows the character to carry out a range of medical tests such as blood tests, read and interpret the output of medical scanners and use medical test equipment.
##Science
**Sci: General [In, Re, Me]**
This skill confers a basic scientific education on the character covering physics, biology and chemistry as these are understood on the characters’ home world or culture. 
**Sci: Xeno [In, Re, Me]**
This skill gives a broader understanding of the sciences incorporating an understanding of alien technologies, particularly alien biology.
##Engineering
**Engineer: Mech [In, Re, Me]**
Mechanical engineering gives the physical skills and knowledge to repair, modify or manufacture mechanical systems. Mechanical Engineers would be people using welding gear, spanners and wrenches.
**Engineer: Weapon [In, Re, Me]**
Weapons engineering gives the physical skills and knowledge to repair, modify or manufacture weapon systems, both personal and mounted heavy weapons..
**Engineer: Software [In, Re, Em]**
Software engineers can design, programs and error check software. It covers both programming and hacking systems.
**Engineer: Hardware [In, Re, Me]**
Hardware engineers have the physical skills and knowledge to repair, modify or manufacture electronic systems including the physical parts of computers, robots and networks. Hardware Engineers would be the people using a soldering iron and voltage meters.
##Psionics
**Psionic Power [Pr,Re, Sd] or [Em, In, Pr]**
This skill confers Power Points on the character. The number of power points is equal to the total skill bonus. 
**Meditations/Gifts [Pr,Re, Sd] or [Em, In, Pr]**
Each meditation has to be developed as a separate skill. The number of ranks in each meditation is the upper limit to the number of power points that may be applied to that meditation.
##Character Creation
To round out your character you can now spend 20 Development Points on skills of your choice. A starting character may have no more ranks in a skill than double their level plus one, meaning that a first level character cannot have more than four ranks in a skill (1st level +1 is 2, two doubled is 4 ranks).
The exception to this cap on ranks is languages which may be learned at any speed.
Each profession has a unique set of costs per skill.
These 20 Development points are intended to allow you to customize your character and add in any skills that their back story suggests they should have. As your character progresses you will gain more Development Points that can be used to improve skills and add new skills.
**Character Creation Example**
Stephen wants his character to be a good all round pilot so wants to buy Combat Pilot (5DP), Hyperspace Pilot (5DP) and Ship Sensors (7DP). This leaves Stephen with 3DP to spend. The last 3DP are spent on an additional rank in Perception.
To complete the skills, Stephen selects ten of the character’s skills to be his ‘prefered skills’. These receive a bonus of +2 per rank for the first twenty ranks.
Stephen can now complete the skills, totaling all the rank, Stat and special bonuses.
All that is left is for Stephen to give his character a name, description and back story. 
