#8.0 Resolving Skills
Most skills require a final result of 101+. The player may add their skill bonus total and any situational modifiers such as superior equipment or additional time to complete the task. The GM then subtracts any difficulty factors to find the final result.
It is possible to get a result significantly over 100%. In these cases either the task took less time than anticipated, or for movement then character went faster, further or higher than anticipated. If there is a possible benefit for doing something exceptionally well, a very high roll can confer some or all of that benefit. In some situations how much ‘more’ is gained or learned from a very high skill roll will be a GM choice.
For simple skill tests, an open ended roll is made and adjustments made as directed. If the final result is below 119 the result is rounded down to the nearest 10 and this is the final result.
If the result is 120 or more then the first 100 is banked and the portion over 100 is halved and rounded down to the nearest 10 and added to the banked 100.
For results that are negative the result is rounded down to the nearest 20.
A result in the range of 0 to 90 represents a partial success, where that is possible. A zero tends to mean that the character failed to make any progress at all. Where a task is a definite pass or fail any result below 100 is a failure. If a character was trying to leap a chasm and only got a result of 90 then they failed to make the jump. If another character tried to grab them and save them they would receive a -10 difficulty penalty to the task as the character was at least 10% short of making the jump.
For tasks that can be partially completed then the final result is the amount of the task complete and another roll may be made in subsequent rounds to complete the task. If the result had been a 90% in the first round any result of 10% or higher would be sufficient to complete the task.
For results over 100 the character may decide to use the excess as additional progress. If a character was climbing a slippery bank and the GM thought it would take three rounds, a total of 300% to complete a result of over 100% would mean that the character has a chance of completing the climb in less than three rounds.
The player may also choose to use the excess to complete another task. For each 30% over the required 100% the character may use 1 action point for another task such as making a perception skill test.
##8.1 Combat Expertise Skills
These skills are never rolled. They are used to reduce penalties and regardless of the skill bonus total they can never give a positive bonus to a skill roll.
##8.2 Negative Results
A result of -20 or lower will deliver an A critical to the character in the most appropriate way possible. If the character was climbing then a fall or at least a slide down the slope may be the cause. If the character was repairing some equipment then they could receive an electric shock if that is possible.
Sometimes this rule will make no sense. If the character was trying to negotiate a price with a high quality diamond dealer they are unlikely to try and punch the customer if it was out of character. If the result makes no sense, ignore it.
Results of -40 or lower will deliver a ‘B’ critical, -60 or lower gives a ‘C’ critical, -80 or lower gives a ‘D’ critical and all results at or below -100 give an ‘E’ critical.
##8.3 Maneuver Results Table
|Roll|	Result|
|-100|	E crit|
|-80|	D crit|
|-60|	C crit|
|-40|	B crit|
|-20|	A crit|
|-19 to 09|	Fail to act|
|10 to 19|	10%|
|20-29|	20%|
|30-39|	30%|
|40-49|	40%|
|50-59|	50%|
|60-69|	60%|
|70-79|	70%|
|80-89|	80%|
|90-99|	90%|
|100-119|	100%|
|120-139|	110%|
|140-159|	120%|
|160-179|	130%|
## 8.4 Hazards

### 8.5 Falling Damage
The further a character falls the more harm they will typically suffer. Damage is in the form of criticals rolled directly on the appropriate table. There is no falling attack table.
|01-04 m| 	A Krush|
|05-10 m |	A Impact|
|11-15 m| 	B Impact|
|16-20 m| 	C Impact|
|21-25 m| 	D Impact|
|26 m+| 	E Impact|
The actual number of meters fallen is added to the critical rolls. All results over 100 are treated as 100. 
Example: Jesse falls 10 m on to a hard surface.  The fall results in an A Impact with +10 on the critical roll. The GM rolls 44 +10 for the falling distance. The result is 54 “Weak blow to victim’s head +10 hits, stunned for 1 rnd” Jesse takes a blow to the head and is stunned and hurt.
##8.6 What Skill When?
The lines between each skill can be blurred, This is intentional. You should use how your characters are trying to solve a problem to decide which skill applies. If there is an explicit skill, that takes precedence over Vocation. If there is no named skill then the character can fall back on their vocational skills.
It is part of the GM’s role to listen to how the characters want to solve a challenge and then call for a skill roll, if a skill test is needed. If what the characters are doing will solve the challenge and it is within their ability to do it. The same is true for social interactions. It is better to role play out a negotiation than it is to roll a Vocation: Diplomacy test.
